27 October, 1982, an interview with Dr. Jerry L.
Green of the Los Alamos National Laboratory. Dr.
Green's a group leader of the MST-11 group and
director of the lab's plutonium facility. An
interview for the Texas A&M Oral History
Collection by Justin Green.
Dr. Green, could you briefly detail how you became
involved with the Los Alamos National Laboratory
and some of the steps of the career progression
that have brought you to your present position?
Well, I was an undergraduate at the University of
New Mexico. I graduated in 1957. However, I first
went to Los Alamos in 1956 as a summer student. at
the end of my junior year. I spent the summer of 56 at
the laboratory in what at that time was referred to
as CMB 11, a slightly different nomenclature, but
was effectively the same group, same function
that I'm associated with now. At the end of the
summer, I went back, finished my senior year at
UNM, and graduated from the university in 1957.
And at that time I went back to Los Alamos and became
a permanent member of the staff at Los Alamos,
again working in CMB 11. And I've effectively been
associated with that group and the laboratory for
my entire professional life, except for a minor
stint when I left the laboratory to go to graduate
school. During the period between 1957 and 1961,
when I left the laboratory to go back to graduate
school, I went to night school in Los Alamos, got a
master degree in nuclear engineering.
Incidentally, my BS, the original degree I was
working on, was in chemical engineering. The
master degree I got in night school at Los Alamos
was, I believe it was properly referred to as a
master degree in mechanical engineering with a
nuclear engineering option. The university at
that time didn't have a nuclear engineering
department. And so the nuclear engineering
degrees were handled through the mechanical
engineering department. In 1960, I believe, I
finished the master's degree. And in 1961, I
decided to leave the laboratory for the period of
time that would be required to finish my
doctorate. So I left the laboratory and went to the
University of California at Berkeley. where I was
a student, a graduate student in the Department of
Chemistry at Berkeley. worked there until 1965
when I returned to Los Alamos. The actual PhD
degree was given, I believe, early in 1966, but I
returned to Los Alamos about Christmas of 1965 and
went back to work until the degree was actually
bestowed.
I came back to the University, or to Los Alamos in
1965. As I said earlier, I went back to the same
group that I was in originally, and I've been there
ever since, obviously as a staff member, and in the
years since, I have become, gone up the ladder
administratively. I've been in a an associate
group leader, and then about five years ago was
made the group leader of the group and have been
that ever since.
Dr. Green, could you briefly describe the
National Laboratory System, how it's operated by
the Department of Energy, and what's the
association of the National Lab with the
University of California? Well, in general, in a
national sense, the national laboratories were
set up to effectively take care of technical
developments that were too expensive for it to be
reasonable for the private sector to pay for and
accept the risk for. And the government many years
ago decided that the only way to be able to pursue
some of these high risk and very expensive
projects was to put them in laboratories that have
been established as effectively centers of
excellence for that kind of development. There
are a number of national laboratories in the
United States now. Los Alamos, obviously,
Livermore, the Argonne National Laboratory, Oak
Ridge National Laboratory, Brookhaven National
Laboratory, and Sandia National Laboratory. I
believe that's all of them at the present time.
There are a number of other laboratories that are
not regarded as national laboratories per se, but
they are to be considered as national resources
technologically.
relationship between Los Alamos and the
University of California and the way it
associates itself with the Department of Energy
National Laboratory System. The University of
California has been involved with Los Alamos
since the inception of the laboratory in 1943 and
has agreed to continue its association with Los
Alamos after the war and obviously up to the
present time. It's my understanding, and I'm not
being a lawyer, I don't really know the legalistic
details of the contracts, But there is a contract
between, well, starting with the AEC and then
going to IRTA and now to the DOE, a contract between
the University of California and the government.
And then there was an additional contract between
the University of California and Los Alamos. And
both of those contracts together effectively
tied the Los Alamos National Laboratory to the
needs and requirements of the National Atomic
Energy System, DOE, at the present time. The same
kind of
contractual arrangement also exists, for
instance, between DOE and the University of
California and the Livermore National
Laboratory in California.
Could you give a brief overview of the Department
of Energy's plutonium program and what are your
views on that program? Well, the DOE doesn't have a
plutonium program per se. Plutonium obviously is
a
major item that's involved in the nuclear aspects
of the DOE's programs. It is a fissile material and
is obviously of substantial
utility with regards to the manufacture of atomic
weapons and also, and very importantly I feel, is
also a a major item in the development of nuclear
reactors. Most of the plutonium reactors, per se,
are associated with the so-called breeder
reactors.
It is a fuel for breeder reactors, and the breeder
reactor generates plutonium that can be plowed
back into the system, if you will, and used for
additional reactors, starting them up.
Obviously, the weapons aspects of the use of
plutonium is where it first started back during
the war. And the use of plutonium, most modern
nuclear weapons involve at least some components
of the device that are made from plutonium metal.
And so it has a substantial importance in that
regard.
Can you describe the operational function of the
TA55 plutonium facility and its standing as a
center for plutonium research? Well, TA55, the T
incidentally simply stands for technical area.
It's a local acronym, if you will, for various
technical areas in Los Alamos. TA-55 is the major
plutonium facility at Los Alamos. By that I don't
necessarily mean that all plutonium work at Los
Alamos is done at TA-55. There's substantial
amounts that are done in other areas at Los Alamos.
But if you're talking about operations that
involve massive amounts of plutonium in general,
they are carried out at TA-55. It's a large
facility that is essentially dedicated to work
with plutonium. It was initially commissioned in
and has been operating ever since. The facility
itself
is the facility was originally set up as
essentially a research and development center
for plutonium. However, in the years since it was
commissioned, there has been a substantial
amount of quasi-production work that has been
required by the DOE and TE55 has been utilized to a
major extent in trying to provide what was needed.
So there's a substantial amount of non-research
and development work that goes on at TE55.
Well, obviously one of the primary functions of
the facility is carrying out the
plutonium-related aspects of nuclear weapons
design and testing, if you will. KE-55 and Los
Alamos in general is not involved in the the
national nuclear weapons stockpile. That's not
the type of work that we're normally involved
with. What we are associated with instead is
effectively
the development of prototype devices that can
eventually be inserted into the weapons
stockpile. In addition to that, there are
significant programs that have gone on in the last
few years that are associated with, for instance,
advanced fuels and liquid metal fast-breeder
reactors. We've been involved in the development
of, for instance, the uranium-plutonium carbide
as an LMFBR fuel since August. the early 1960s and
have been heavily involved with it ever since.
There are also projects that are associated with
some special isotopes of plutonium.
Plutonium-238, for instance, is used for the
manufacture of what are effectively
radioisotopic heat sources. They, in some cases,
are used simply for that, as heat sources. For
instance, some of these heat sources are inserted
in various deep space probes, and their function
is to generate heat and keep various electronic
components, for instance, warm enough to operate
reliably. In addition, manufacture or develop
heat sources that can be married to thermal
electric generators. And the plutonium-230 heat
source, once associated with a thermal electric
generator, becomes a very long-term and stable
electrical power source.
power sources of that type have been put on, again,
space probes. And when they're going deep space
probes, it gets so far from the sun that solar
collectors and solar electric generators are no
longer sufficiently effective than the thermal
electrics can take over. run for the number of
years probes life. Some of these thermoelectric
generators, for instance, are sitting on the moon
right now. These 230 gauge heat sources were sent
to the moon and are still sending back or powering
equipment that sends back various types of
information. The seismic equipment on the moon
now is still sending back information and is being
powered by
What are your feelings on the massive involvement
the civilian industry has recently taken in the
nuclear weapons industry?
Oh, I don't think that the trying to categorize it
as a recent involvement is quite correct. I think
the private sector has been involved to a major
extent throughout the the years that nuclear
weapons have been in existence. I think that the
nuclear weapons stockpile is a very large and
complicated system, and it, I think, well it has
been set up in a way that involves the private
sector it might be possible for all of that work to
be done strictly in governmental laboratories
but I think that probably would not be terribly
effective or efficient as to whether or not
one should imply from your question that there may
or may not be a
It may or may not be proper for the private sector to
be involved. I really don't have any strong
feelings on that. The work has to be done, whether
it's done by the private sector or the government,
is really a pragmatic question as far as I'm
concerned, who can do it and do it the best. It works
very well, and when you've got a good thing, don't
fool with it, I guess.
Are the security measures currently in effect in
regards to the National Laboratory and
specifically in relation to weapons-grade
plutonium or uranium? Do you feel that those are
currently a reasonable defense effort?
I think that it's perfectly reasonable. However,
I think it should be pointed out that Essentially,
no safeguard system can be absolutely foolproof.
You can't have a safeguard system that allows you
the freedom to get the work done that completely
eliminates all possibility, for instance, of
diversion. That possibility is always going to
exist. The only way, for instance, that I can say
that a given facility is completely free from any
possibility of diversion is to slam the front
doors and send everybody home. You have to have
people involved in doing the work.
fortunately or unfortunately the weak link in any
kind of security system is the people and whether
or not you can take a particular group of people and
say these people are absolutely trustworthy
unfortunately that's very rarely possible we do
involve ourselves in some fairly rigorous
techniques for trying to filter up people that
might be a problem. But again, that kind of
procedure is simply not foolproof, and I see no
good way to make it so. To your knowledge, have
there ever been any specific instances or
operations in which security has been
compromised or in which an appreciable quantity
of a weapons-grade material has been lost or
taken? Your question really had two parts. I think
with regards to the first part, I really am not
particularly knowledgeable with regards to
security breaches, that is, informational
leaks. The question of whether or not there have
been significant amounts of material diverted, I
think is what you were referring to in the second
part of the question. To my knowledge, there has
never been any well-documented or situation
where it could be positively stated that material
had, in fact, been diverted. It is frankly my
opinion that generally significant amounts of
material probably have not been diverted. Now, I
can't see that positively from first-hand
knowledge. but I know of no major diversions,
certainly not from Los Alamos. Now that does not
necessarily mean that material has not been lost
at one time or another. There have been situations
where material has either by accident or from just
plain ineptitude been lost from the system. But I
really don't know of any situation where I can say
of my own knowledge that material has
Do you believe that if a sizable enough quantity of
material were diverted and, for example, were
sold to some group, that it would be possible with
the common knowledge or the technology commonly
available to the average man to construct some
sort of device that could be used more or less as a
weapon? Oh, I think there's absolutely no doubt
that if sufficient amounts of material were made
available, possibly not to the common man, as you
put it, but there are many, many people that are
available that have the technical background to
take a sufficient amount of material and make a
rudimentary device. I think that the chances are
that it would be very inefficient, but in general
the kinds of things that clandestine diverters
would be interested in manufacturing, I think
high efficiency and high yield are really not a
major concern. I think in a lot of cases, devices
that might be built to use in nuclear blackmail
situations whether or not they really work or not
is not a major concern in the blackmail scenario. I
think that all they have to do is make a good-sized
mess, and they've served their function. But I,
yes, I think that given a sufficient amount of
material, it would not be incredible at all for
rudimentary devices to be manufactured by
non-experts,
if you will. What are some of your perspectives and
how might they have changed since you were a
student at Berkeley on the anti-nuclear crusade?
That covers a multitude of sins. The
anti-nuclear... Well, I don't think I'd really
like to refer to it as a crusade, although in some
cases that's the way it's handled. There are
people that do have legitimate personal
concerns, and I would not for a minute try to
suggest that people of that sort should not
express those concerns. I think that in many
cases, much of the noise that's been generated by
the so-called anti-nuclear movements are, as I
say, in most cases, I think, they are legitimate
and they are genuinely concerned, and well, they
should be. There are certainly situations where
the nuclear devices that modern man has to deal
with can be dangerous. There's absolutely no
question about that. I think that generally
though that much of the noise and flap that is
raised by the so-called anti-nuclear movement
principally based on ignorance. And that's
unfortunate. And frankly, I think that a
substantial amount of the
blame for that kind of a situation may very well
have to be placed at the feet of the so-called
experts. And I guess I'll have to place myself in
that category, too. People are dealing with the
situation out of fear. And
I think it's fear born in ignorance. And
unfortunately the
fact that they're ignorant has to be to a certain
extent blamed on the people that are not ignorant.
In the past few years, I think people that are
associated with the nuclear industry have been
trying to provide information to the public. But
it's frustrating. It's frustrating to me because
information that we do put out either is not
understood intentionally or unintentionally. I
can't really comment as to to what the problem is
there, but oftentimes when we in good faith go out
and try to provide information, it gets turned
around like a snake in a hole and it bites us. It's
very difficult to handle in what I regard as a
reasonably responsible way. The public deserves
the information, absolutely. Unfortunately,
the information is sufficiently complex that it
is a very difficult problem trying to decide or to
come up with a technique to provide the
information to the man on the street, if you will,
in a format that he can understand.
When you were a student at Berkeley, did you have
any problems or were there any roots of the
anti-nuclear crusade within the free speech
movement that was active at that time on campus?
As I recall, when I was at Berkeley, the free speech
movement was in progress. However, as I recall,
they had no particular involvement with the
anti-nuclear issue. When I was there as a student,
it was
a little bit difficult to determine just exactly
what the free speech movement stood for. The young
gentleman that was the leader of that movement and
got it started was a fellow by the name of Mario
Savio. and he was there at the same time that I was at
Berkeley. Frankly, just exactly what Mr. Savio
stood for, I have a little bit of difficulty trying
to determine at this point frankly at the time as a
student I viewed it somewhat simplistically
probably but Mr. Savio and his cohorts were just a
bunch of ding-a-lings as far as I was concerned
they really were I'm sure they thought they had
something to say but I'm darned if I know what it was
It was an interesting situation. I learned some
things about the way that these so-called
movements operate, and it was interesting to me. I
was a student on the campus at the same time they
were holding their demonstrations, and it gave me
a at least relative to that particular situation
something of an insight as to the way that people
information and the media were manipulated by
those groups I will have to say that they did it very
well but I can remember any number of
demonstrations, if you will, that took place on
campus that I personally viewed there'd be 15, 20,
30 people clustered together having a
demonstration and the media would be there with
their cameras doing what they're supposed to be
doing and I'd go home at night and see those see the
films played back on that particular
demonstration and my goodness it looked like
there were hundreds of people involved and they
had the whole campus disrupted It was absolutely
untrue. That was not the situation at all. And it
was interesting to me how, and I very frankly feel
that, well, certainly in that particular case,